---
title: The Bioinformatics community on NCI
description: A shared repository for bioinformatics tools, workflows, databases, and containers. 
toc: false
type: ABLeS Participant
---

## Project title

The Australian BioCommons tools and workflows repository

## Collaborators and funding

[The Australian BioCommons](https://www.biocommons.org.au/)

[National Computational Infrastructure](https://nci.org.au/)



## Contact(s)

- Ziad Al-Bkhetan <ziad@biocommons.org.au>
- Johan Gustafsson <johan@biocommons.org.au>


## Project description and aims

ABLeS participants and NCI users have access to the Australian BioCommons Tools and Workflows project, in project allocation `if89`. This is a repository of popular tools, containers and workflows that can be used by anyone in the NCI user participant. Anyone from an NCI participant can contribute to if89 and add more tools that will be shared with others.


## How is ABLeS supporting this work?

This work is supported through the software accelerator scheme provided by ABLeS. The supports includes 10 TB long term storage.

## Expected outputs enabled by participation in ABLeS

A shared repository for popular bioinformatics tools, workflows, databases, and containers that can be usilised directly by all NCI users including ABLeS participants. This will avoid effort replication to deploy all these resources by the individual users. 


<br/>

> *These details have been provided by project members at project initiation. For more information on the project, please consult the contact(s) or project links above.*
